 

 

 

 

Routesetting  

Development  

Textbook and Other  

Things Like Luke’s  

Ramblings and Nicole’s  

Actually Useful Stuff 

Part I – Foundations 

Introduction 

Purpose of the Textbook 

Climbing is hard. Routesetting is harder. Ask any setter about their upbringing in the craft, and you will likely hear some form of lackluster mentorship and guidance. Because of the infinite complexities of climbing and the nature of our job, the learning process can quickly become convoluted, niche, and frustrating.  

Our goal is to make this learning process clear and progressive. Routesetting often feels overwhelming because it demands mastery of climbing movement, design theory, and hardware skills all while relying on physical wellbeing, safety protocols, and community engagement. By breaking these masteries down into sections, this textbook helps new setters develop autonomy and strive for progression through the many avenues of setting.  

It is very important to remember that this is not a rigid rulebook. There is no “right” way to set climbs, and everyone approaches it differently. Instead, we wanted to create a living document to reference as you grow. We always encourage experimentation, iteration, and a bit of breaking the rules.  

 
How to Use This Guide 

This textbook is broken down into 5 Parts: Foundations, Apprenticeship Framework, Key Concepts, Deep Dives, and the Appendix. In each Part are subsections that provide easy navigation and a more narrow scope than the broader section. 

Foundations covers the very basics and is mostly a reference for Day 1 on the job.  

Apprenticeship Framework is the meat and potatoes for mentors and apprentices alike. It offers a phase-based approach for bringing an F1 or F2 level apprentice into a self-sufficient F3 capable routesetter. We believe that meaningful progression through these phases means you are ready for a career, local travel, and potentially full-time status. 

Key Concepts are deeper dives into important ideas behind our job. In it you will find mostly abstract writings about what and why, but not necessarily how. Keep in mind that these are opinions based on the experience of various setters, not objective truths. 

The Appendix is not to be confused with the human appendix. 

 

 
Routesetting Philosophy 

Maybe a couple small paragraphs on the broad “why”, fun, sustainability and such 

Routesetters frequently lose the forest for the trees; and they’ll be the first to admit it. Behind all the theory and experimentation is the simple fact that we screw plastic to a wall for a living and people find joy in that space. That joy is paramount. Without it we have no members, no money, and no job. Back to the office we go! 

At the end of the day, people doing climbs is good. We will worry about unforced sequences, downgrades, upgrades, tall beta, craftsmanship, design theory, color theory, and how much our elbows and fingers and everything else hurt. But it is often the case that the climber getting to the top of the climb is a net positive. What joy! 

But with all this comes the aforementioned labor toll. Our bodies can only handle so much and everybody handles the same things very differently. While pushing our craft and getting the work done is important, it is even more important that we keep our bodies healthy.  

There’s some writings about this somewhere i like better i wanna steal.^ 

 

Orientation & Basics 

Gym Orientation REVIEW 

    Gym tour: 

    Break room/lounge, office, maintenance closet 

    Emergency Action Plan (EAP) and fire escapes 

    AEDs 

    Don’t be afraid to call 911 in case of emergency! 

    Holds room tour: 

     Sorting, washing, personal item storage, cleanliness 

    Maintenance tasks: 

    Cleaning holds (washing, sometimes organizing) 

    Cleaning and maintaining system boards, spray walls 

    Organizing holds room and bolt cart 

    Wall hardware and AB inspections 

    Telling Evan he’s stinky 
     

Tools & Safety REVIEW 

El Cap Routesetter Training Checklist.docx 

Dress Code & Professional Standards REVIEW 

1. Dress Code 

On Shift (Setting Days) 

    Top: Movement Routesetter T-Shirt/Tank. 

    Bottoms: Durable work pants or shorts (consider harness use). 

    Footwear: Closed-toe shoes are mandatory while working.  

 

During Competitions 

    USAC/Official Events: Routesetter shirt (unless specified otherwise). 

    Local Comps: Head Setter’s discretion (often theme-dependent). 

 

Off-Clock (Climbing/Training) 

    If attending an external event representing Movement, maintain professional civilian attire. 

 

2. Communication 

Channels 

    Text: Primary channel for immediate updates, daily schedule changes (morning of/night before), and crew coordination. 

    Email: Primary channel for official requests (HR, time off, policy updates). Check your Movement email routinely. 

 

Time Off 

    Vacation requests must be submitted via email at least two weeks in advance. 

    Last-minute sick time should be communicated to your Head Setter immediately. 

 

3. Timekeeping & Scheduling 

The System: We use Humanity for scheduling and time clocks. 

The Rules: 

    Deadlines: Timesheets must be reviewed and accurate by Monday at 7:00 AM (bi-weekly). 

    Lunch: A 30-minute unpaid lunch break is mandatory for full shifts. You must clock out/in or manually add it. 

    Weekly Hours (Full Time): 

    Target: 35 hours of work (Setting, Forerunning, Shop maintenance). 

    Wellness: 5 hours allotted for personal training/climbing (Wellness Hours). 

    Hard Cap: Do not exceed 40 total hours without direct approval from leadership. Do not exceed 30 total hours if part time. 

 

Reimbursement & Perks: 

    Travel: If you are scheduled at a gym that is not your "Home Gym," you are eligible for compensation via Expense Reimbursement Request (ERR) or Drive Time. See your Head Setter for the current rates and submission methods. 

    Shoe Stipend: Both Part-time and Full-time setters are eligible for a shoe stipend. Connect with your Head Setter for details on frequency and amount. https://elcapcom.sharepoint.com/sites/Routesetting_Home/SitePages/Routesetter-Shoe-Benefit-Program.aspx 

 

 

  

Chain of Command REVIEW 

National Leadership 

Sets the global vision, standards, and safety protocols for Movement gyms across the US.  

Senior Director of Routesetting:       Ryan Sewell (stinky) 

 

DFW Regional Leadership 

Oversees the health of the program across the entire Dallas-Fort Worth market, managing hiring, budgets, and regional events. Also stinky. 

Director of Routesetting: 		    Tucker Black 

Assistant Director of Setting: 	    Evan Woods 

 

Gym-Specific Leadership (Head Setters) 

Your direct supervisor. These are the people you will interact with daily regarding assignments, feedback, and scheduling. Not stinky. 

Plano / Denton: 			    Evan Woods 

Grapevine / Fort Worth: 		    Nicole Baviera 

The Hill: 				    Jack Simon 

Design District: 			    Luke Sherlock 

TTX Training Centers: 		    Theo Massenat 

 

Who do I talk to about XYZ? 

Usually your Head Setter. Always feel free to talk to Evan or Tucker, or even a GD as well for any reason. 

 

  

Part II – Apprenticeship Framework 

[A small paragraph here as well about the idea behind the phases?] 

I see two ways through this, obviously dependent on the exact apprentice and their style: 

Approach A: Quality (Luke’s idea) 

“Slow is smooth, smooth is fast.” 

Phase 1: Set 2-3 boulders per day, avoiding ropes for now. Focus on commercial flow, forcing sequences, and comfort.  

Phase 2: The base quality is there, now do it more efficiently. Learn the ropes (literally) up to 1 route/day.  

Only worry about boulders for an arbitrary amount of time. Then introduce WAH. 

Approach B: Pace (Nicole’s idea) 

“You can’t refine a product you didn’t finish.” 

Phase 1: Get up to pace setting 4 boulders and up to 2 routes. Do it safely while gaining autonomy and understanding along the way. 

Phase 2: Now that you can get the product on the wall, slow down and refine skill. 

Ropes along the way the whole time. 

Approach A: Quality (Luke’s Idea) 

Luke’s proposition: 3 phases, boulder-oriented at the start, ropes later. 

Phase 1: Fundamentals & Flow 

    Focus: Understanding movement, tool competence, and the "Why." 

    Volume: Low | 2-3 Boulders per day 

    Ropes: None. 

    Why? Cognitive load. Learning to create good movement is mentally exhausting. Learning to not die on a rope is mentally exhausting. Doing both at the same time results in bad setting and safety mistakes (ask me how I know). Let them master the drill on a ladder first. 

    Exit Criteria (loose and always open for discussion):  

    Set 4 boulders in a day for the first time. 

    Fulfilled some commercial flow and basic comp move assignments. 

Phase 2: Efficiency & Verticality 

    Focus: Now we add time pressure. Introduce Ropesetting (WAH) and demand efficiency (to an extent of course. We all have those days). 

    Volume: Standard (Matching typical crew pace of 3-4+ boulders, 1-1.5+ routes). 

    Ropes (WAH): INTRODUCED. 

    This could be Month 2 or Month 3. The trigger isn't a given time but is more like mastery of Phase 1. Once they can set decent boulders without thinking too hard, they have the brain space to learn WAH. 

    Exit Criteria:  

    Stripped and set a zone at the usual crew pace. Basic WAH proficiency. 

    Used all extraneous tools at least once: ratchet, vice grips, bolt cutter, etc. 

Phase 3: Style & Autonomy 

    Focus: Aesthetics, more complex assignments, and volume utility. 

    Volume: Typical F3 quota.  

    Exit Criteria:  

    Explored setting at/beyond their project limit. 

    Explored various aesthetic and movement styles. 

    Led placement for a big volume day in the morning. 

    Tagged the set for a day (alongside head/lead setter). 

Exit Criteria and phase progression at the discretion of both the entire crew and apprentice, encouraging open dialogue and “we’re all doing this to different extents every day.” Progress is rarely linear. Encourage overlap between phases, allowing apprentices to advance in areas where they excel while continuing to refine their skills in others. 

Approach B: Pace (Nicole’s Idea) 

Phases of Development 

Split the early progression of routesetting apprenticeship into four phases.  

Phase 1 

Acquiring setting skills needed to comfortably set in all disciplines. Work up to setting 4 boulders/2 routes in the allotted time, with basic assignments. 

The primary focus is learning the pace, and gaining autonomy 

Phase 2 

Now that the apprentice has learned the pace for setting, adjust quota to give time to refine skills.  

The primary focus is to improve the quality of their product and challenge their abilities by introducing new concepts. 

Phase 3 

Tackling more complex setting assignments while matching pace. 

The primary focus is on efficiency and consistency in quality of product (Phase 1 + Phase 2) 

Phase 4 

The apprentice is now working on amplifying their skillset to be as diverse as possible. 

The primary focus is ensuring that the apprentice meets the expectations needed to become an F3 or higher. (Phase 3, but amplified) 

 

Phase 1: Training & Foundations 

    Focus: Acquiring setting skills needed to comfortably set in all disciplines. Work up to setting 4 boulders/2 routes in the allotted time, with basic assignments. The primary focus is learning the pace, and gaining autonomy 

    Volume: Gradual, working up to setting 4 boulders/2 routes. 

    Ropes: If applicable to the apprentice, introduce after 1-2 months of boulder setting. 

    Exit Criteria (loose and always open for discussion):  

    Set 4 boulders comfortably in a day while matching pace 

    Set 2 routes comfortably in a day while matching pace 

    Understands WAH system and is comfortable, but still supervised 

    Fulfilled some commercial flow and basic comp move assignments. 

    Concepts: 

    Training Checklist (create a digital copy or print out) 

    Tool safety: proper use of drills, ladders, bits, PPE 

    gear and tools 

    Setting up a zone and what are the considerations 

    Practices for bouldering, top rope, and lead 

    Stripping routes safely and efficiently 

    Basics skills and additional ones, such addressing spinners or inspecting gear 

    Shadow experienced setters on full reset day 

    Understand basic wall angles and traffic flow 

    Set first boulder under supervision 

    Practice placing holds securely with proper bolt/washer usage 

    Forerun and tweak problems with guidance 

    Introduction to movement creation 

    Learn gym’s grading scale and philosophy 

    Understand intended audience: beginners, intermediates, regulars 

    Explore basic styles: tension, compression, balance, coordination 

    Adjust problems based on forerunner/user input 

    Hit time benchmarks (4 boulders, 2 routes) 

    Soft focus on achieving 1-2 categories per assignment 

Phase 2: Movement, Design & Grading 

    Focus: Now that the apprentice has learned the pace for setting, adjust quota to give time to refine skills. The primary focus is to improve the quality of their product and challenge their abilities by introducing new concepts. 

    Volume: Varying for both disciplines 

    Ropes and Boulders: Taking on more specific assignments and focusing on learning from/improving those concepts. 

    Exit Criteria (loose and always open for discussion):  

    On any given day alternate between: 

    Meeting normal quotas, or 

    Meeting a lesser quota while fulfilling more specific goals 

    Has mastered WAH systems and no longer needs supervision. 

    Fulfilled some commercial flow and basic comp move assignments. 

    Concepts: 

    Create consistent movement flow within circuits 

    Set multiple boulders of varying grades in a day 

    Collaborate with team on setting days and wall planning 

    Forerun other setters' problems and give constructive feedback 

    Focus on achieving 2+ categories per assignment 

    More emphasis on aesthetics 

    More advanced use and understanding of WAH tools and practices 

 

Phase 3: Efficiency & Consistency 

    Focus: Tackling more complex setting assignments while matching pace. The primary focus is on efficiency and consistency in quality of product (Phase 1 + Phase 2) 

    Volume: 4 boulders/2 routes 

    Ropes and Boulders: Pace and quality should now meet in the middle, having more refined skeletons at the desired pace. 

    Exit Criteria (loose and always open for discussion):  

    Consistently delivering diverse, high-quality product that is also visually appealing. 

    Has mastered hold selection: determining appropriate intensity, meshing different hold sets together, and choosing shapes that fit and create the desired movement. 

    Has fully mastered WAH systems and feels confident. 

    Concepts: 

    Complete a full day of setting with minimal supervision 

    Forerun efficiently and feel confident in assessing grades without the input of others. 

    Set high quality skeletons that are eye-catching and intentional 

    Use volumes and features effectively to shape movement 

    Maintain quality in both easy and hard problems 

    Focus on consistently achieving 2+ categories per assignment, while maintaining quality throughout the product set and matching the pace of the crew. 

Phase 4: Style, Intention & Autonomy 

    Focus: The apprentice is now working on amplifying their skillset to be as diverse as possible. The primary focus is ensuring that the apprentice meets the expectations needed to become an F3 or higher. (Phase 3, but amplified) 

    Volume: 4 boulders/2 routes, and beyond when possible/needed. 

    Ropes and Boulders: Pace and quality should now meet in the middle, having more refined skeletons at the desired pace. 

    Exit Criteria (loose and always open for discussion):  

    Continues to push their abilities and work toward being a well-rounded setter and forerunner. 

    Is a valued crew member who often goes above and beyond. 

    Is looking for a promotion opportunity and feel confident in their skills and abilities.  

    Needs little to no supervision on a day-to-day basis. 

    Concepts: 

    Develop individual style awareness, understand other crew members’ individual styles and how to use this understanding as a tool in forerunning. 

    Look outwards and pay attention to the safety and well-being of other crew members, no longer solely preoccupied by their own contributions to the team. 

    Consistently design boulders with intentional beta or teaching goals. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Part III – Key Concepts 

Feedback Loops 

Arguably, the most important single trait for refining your sets is developing an internal feedback loop. In forerunning, and especially when reviewing assignment climbs, we discuss what works and what doesn’t work. We ask questions not only to clarify, but to verbalize a climber’s in-the-moment feeling and mesh that with the intended nature of the climb.  

We often arrive at solutions by asking questions that highlight a problem. Why do I want to cross instead of match? Why does the pogo not feel right? What allows me to gain this position first instead of doing the sequence I want? These come up in daily discussions during forerunning, but we must also keep them in our head when setting. Thus arises the need for a self-critical feedback loop.  

Asking yourself questions as you set is critical; it saves time, it develops intuition, it makes forerunning easier, and it encourages a constant self-critique in search of betterment. A simple question you can ask yourself for almost any climb is “What can the climber do that isn’t what I want?” And then, of course, “why?”.  The “what” is easy. The “why” ... not so much. 

Let’s run through a simple example. You are setting a V3 focused on a critical heel hook. Perhaps you’re aiming to develop a moderate climbers’ ability to intuit heel-hooking and develop that skill at an approachable level. With that goal in mind you put some holds on the wall and get the sequence going. And so you begin: “What can the climber do that isn’t a heel hook?” You first recognize that the climber may decide to skip the heel hook entirely. Okay, you ask yourself, “why?” Are the given feet too secure? Is the position not off-balance enough? Are the holds too downpulling? Is the heel too high? Too low? Does the climber get enough opposition with the heel hook? Does the heel hook allow the climber to gain a hold/position that otherwise would be too difficult to gain? Is it V3 to do the heel hook or V6? Is it V4 to skip the heel hook or V2? Is the heel comfortable enough to be intuitive? How much hip mobility does it require? Is it hard on the knees?  

Out of all the possible answers of that jumble of questions, there's some method that's the easiest way forward. Like all things in climbing, the answer is contextual to several factors such as grade, wall angle, hold choice, intended audience, and much more. As you run through these questions for setting a heel hook, you’ll notice patterns of answers that are generally true that make heel hooking feel good. The more heel hooks you set, the more questions you ask, answer, and iterate on. This is the fundamental feedback loop of routesetting. 

We can generalize this process and apply it to any climb we set. The only requirement is that we have a desired outcome beforehand. In the previous example, the desired outcome was helping “a moderate climber to intuit heel-hooking and develop that skill at an approachable level.” If you have your goal in mind, your questions at the ready, and are prepared to iterate over and over and over again, you will become a better routesetter.   

Commercial Flow Progression 

This section is designed to be a practical checklist of core movements. For each assignment, the goal is to create the specified move in a boulder and then reflect on the mechanics and motivations behind it. This is a "living" list that should be returned to and refined over time. New apprentices can aim to set one of these and one ‘free’ boulder per day when starting out. More experienced apprentices should look to combinations of these and more complex versions to iterate on. 

Assignment 
	

Reflection 
	

Completed/Tally 

Ergonomically 'Comfy' 
	

What makes a climb feel comfortable and intuitive? 
	

 

Off-Balance Moves 
	

Set two off-balance moves in one boulder. What specific elements created the off-balance feeling? 
	

 

Forced Hand Sequence 
	

Set a boulder that dictates the hand sequence. How did you achieve this? 
	

 

Forced Foot Sequence 
	

Set a boulder that dictates the foot sequence. Which was harder to force: hands or feet? Why? 
	

 

Forced Dyno 
	

Set a mostly forced dyno. What factors make the dynamic movement feel necessary versus optional? 
	

 

Match 
	

Set a move that requires a hand match. Why is matching the most efficient or only solution? 
	

 

Dropknee 
	

Create a sequence that encourages a dropknee. What about the hold orientation and spacing makes a dropknee the natural choice? 
	

 

Rose Move 
	

Design a sequence that is best solved with a Rose move. What makes this effective? 
	

 

Pogo 
	

Design a sequence where a pogo is the most effective beta. What makes a pogo functional? 
	

 

Heel Hook 
	

Set a mostly forced heel hook. What motivates the climber to place a heel hook? 
	

 

Toe Hook 
	

Set a mostly forced toe hook. What motivates the climber to place a toe hook? 
	

 

Kneebar 
	

Design a sequence that utilizes a kneebar. How can you ensure a kneebar is equitable yet safe? 
	

 

Recycle 
	

Create a situation where a climber needs to recycle. What makes this necessary? 
	

 

Bicycle 
	

Set a sequence that encourages using a "bicycle" with the feet. Why is this technique useful here? 
	

 

Flip Hold 
	

Utilize a ‘flip hold’ in a sequence. Why is it helpful? 
	

 

Deadpoint 
	

Set a deadpoint. Discuss the ‘trailing foot’. 
	

 

 

It’s recommended to develop these fundamentals before moving onto coordination moves. A better understanding of why hold/body positioning, hold orientations, grip quality, and wall angles combine to make certain things work is a massive prerequisite for creating more complex moves. Those coordination moves will only be made better, and more efficient, when these fundamentals are understood. 

It’s important to note that this is not ‘one and done’. These are the most common fundamentals that will be iterated on, taken to their extreme, and absolutely used over and over again in the course of one’s setting career. Feel free to return to these if ever out of ideas and iterate on them in a new way each time. There are a literal infinite number of ways to set, engage, and use a heel hook for example. As you progress, come back to these fundamentals and redesign them with new aesthetics, new complexities, and new morphologies in mind. 

TODO: Is this all the moves we want? 

  

Coordination Move Progression 

This section introduces common coordination moves that are easier to set and build on fundamental movements. This list is the “meat and the potatoes” of the majority of competition movements, and even the most complex, high level climbs will typically feature a combination of these moves. 

Assignment 
	

Reflection 
	

Completed/Tally 

Skate Move 
	

Set a simple skate that must be done dynamically. How did you force dynamic execution? 
	

 

Step Up 
	

How do you encourage a climber to dynamically weight a high foot, rather than just pulling past it with their arms? 
	

 

Flip Catch 
	

What generates the rotational momentum for the flip? How do the start and end holds guide it? 
	

 

Palm Press 
	

What hold shapes and positions encourage a palm press for opposition or balance? 
	

 

Paddle 
	

Why can't the climber move only to the catch hold? 
	

 

Lache 
	

How do you set the starting holds to allow for maximum swing generation? What makes the target hold catchable after releasing all points of contact? 
	

 

Tobinator 
	

How do you get the climber to jump with their palm? 
	

 

Brazilian 
	

How do you encourage the climber to keep moving instead of stopping? How do you do it safely? 
	

 

 

TODO: Add other foundational coordo moves if any? 

 

  

Workflow 

We often say slow is smooth, smooth is fast. This works well for longer tedious tasks, such as ropesetting commercial flow and stripping a zone, but does not fully capture many of the efficiencies to make our job both physically and mentally easier. An efficient setter has their systems dialed to suit their personal needs and style in consideration of their crew. An inefficient setter wastes precious energy repeating unnecessary tasks, going back and forth, and overworking their body more than necessary.  

 

It’s important to note the difference between moving efficiently and moving fast. Moving fast can be costly; not only to the product offering’s quality but also to the safety of the setters and community. We must not conflate the two. Skipping screw checks, leaving a dirty zone, and rushing the strip are NOT efficient; they are amateur ways of trying to move faster. 

 

Stripping 

Standard 

Screws on the way up, bolts on the way down for boulders. For ropes, take out screws in batches and bolts in batches so you’re not changing your bit all the time.  

Styles 

Luke –  

Kyle –  

Fred –  

Samantha –  

 

Hold Shopping 

Standard 

You usually want a mix of macros, match holds, single hands, spike feet and smeary/edge feet for options. Pick from 1-3 different sets to maintain visual clarity and match shapes/textures. 

Styles 

Luke –  

Kyle –  

Fred –  

Samantha –  

 

 

Moving Materials 

Standard 

Baskets/carts for buckets, volumes, full boulders, and cones. Milk crates/small buckets for tweak holds and small boulders.  

Styles 

Luke –  

Kyle –  

Fred –  

Samantha – 

Organizing Zone 

Standard 

Minimize the amount of loose hardware on the floor and push all personal supplies to the edges/off the mats. Ladders, carts, and buckets should all stay at the edge of the zone unless actively used. For the most part, if you had to pack up and open zone right this moment: would it be safe to climb over? 

Styles 

Luke –  

Kyle –  

Fred – 

Samantha – 

 

Setting 

Standard 

Standard!? What standard? 

Styles 

Luke – 

Kyle – 

Fred – 

Samantha – 

 

Lunch 

Standard 

Typically any time between 10am-12pm for 30-45 minutes. Location, length, and conversation dependent on crew :). Warmup after also dependent on crew. 

Styles 

Luke – Chick Fil A 

Kyle – Also CfA 

Fred – Trader Joe’s frozen Indian food with mix-ins 

Samantha – serious gourmet shit, egg 

 

Forerunning 

Standard 

Typically between 12pm-3pm but sometimes runs shorter or longer depending on workload. Most crews have a hard stop at 4 or 5pm. Work up the grades or do a heavy warmup and start at the top end, then work up the grades. Heavily crew dependent. 

Styles 

Luke – 

Kyle – 

Fred – 

Samantha – 

 

 

Aesthetics 

Like all things in climbing, aesthetics are incredibly subjective. The purpose of this section is not to box you in to the pre-existing design philosophy of one setter/crew/region, but to use their existing experience as a starting point for developing your own aesthetic voice.  

You have a vocabulary of movement from Commercial Flow and Coordination Moves. Aesthetics is about learning how to arrange those movements into compelling experiences on the wall. Can we create a climb that not only feels good to move on but also invites the climber to try from across the gym? What sparks that invitation? 

A newer setter will struggle to balance this mix of form and function, having to make concessions one way or another. A good setter incorporates aesthetics as a typical part of their work; integrating their climbs within the broader context of the set/gym and striving towards a cohesive visual feel. A great setter does the above with no second thought, as it is an intuitive part of their creative process. They push the boundaries of design space in routesetting while maintaining functionality, assignment accuracy, and safety. 

 

Part IV – Deep Dives 

Safety First 

 
Flow & Movement 

 
Grading & Difficulty 

 
Hold Selection & Placement 

 
User Experience 

 
Traffic & Wall Usage 

 
Technical Considerations 

 
Environmental & Contextual Factors 

Volume Placement 

 
Target Audience 
Gym Culture 

Adapting Your Vision 

 

  

Part V – Appendix 

Setting Repertoire 

Static 
	

Dynamic 
	

Coordo 
	

Style Assignment 

Bump 

Heel hook 

Toe hook 

Knee bar 

Layback 

Compression 

Hip Turn 

Drop Knee 

Recycle 

Rose Move 

Mantle 

Press 

Stem 

Bat Hang 

Bicycle 

Inverted Bike 

Clockwork 

Inside Flag 

Perch 

Pincer 

Hand-Heel Match 

Heel-Toe Cam 
	

Throw 

Deadpoint 

Dyno 

Double Clutch 

Flip Catch 

Pogo 

Barn door 

Drive By 

Gill Start 

Running Start 

Hotswap/Houdini 

Handcuff 

Reverse Handcuff 

Campus 

 

 

 
	

Flip Catch 

Ninja Kick 

Skate 

Lache 

Step Up 

Brazilian 

Paddle 

Half-Paddle 

Redirect Paddle 

Double/triple/quad Paddle 

Pommel/Tobinator (sidepull) 

Pommel/Tobinator (gaston) 

Toe Hook Catch 

Toe Hook Release 

Pirouette 

Undercling Foot-Stomp 

 
	

Tension 

Complex 

Powerful 

Slow 

Fast 

Pure 

Frustrating Start (bruh why?) 

Technical 

Flow 

Dynamic 

Funk 

Flexibility 

Coordination 

Aesthetic 

JUGS 

Rock Climb 

Pockets 

Minimalism 

Maximalism 

Negative Space 

Complex 
	

Situations 
	

 

180 Kneebar 

360 Campus 

Cobra Strike 

Dropknee Toe-Hook 

One-Handed Bump 

Egyptian 

Figure 4 

Figure 9 

French Start 

Floating kneebar 

Foot clockwork 

Inside Flag Toe-Hook 

Cartwheel 
	

Foot-First Sequences 

No hands 

Inside Palm-Press 

Piano matching 

Sidebody tension 

Frontal tension 

Posterior tension 

Toehook Walk/Heel swap 

The Alpine Knee 

 

 
	

 

 

Maintenance, Tools, and Problem Solving 
	

Bouldering  
	

Ropes 

Piloting a hold 

Using Vice Grips 

 

Ways to take out a stuck hold 

Cutting a bolt 

Ratchet 

Bolt Buster 

 

Driving the lift 

Operating the lift from the basket 

 
	

Set 4 boulders 

 

Completed setting assignment: 

Target audience 

Aesthetics focused 

Function focused 

Indoor Boulder replica 

Outdoor Boulder replica 

Style assignment 

Equitable Dyno's 

Specific move assignment 

Forcing a sequence 

 

Set a boulder within 30min, 15min, etc.,  

Use Plastik autonomously 

Have shadowed every crew member 

 
	

Set 2 rope routes 

 

Used WAH gear w/o needing direction 

No/minimal tweaks after second run 

 

Completed setting assignment:  

Target audience 

Aesthetics focused 

Function focused 

Style assignment 

Specific move assignment 

Forcing a sequence 

 

References and Resources 

TODO Hyperlinks to any referenced documentation and additional hyperlinks to other stuff whether or not it’s within or outside the company (podcasts/youtubes/instagrams etc) 

    El Cap Routesetter Training Checklist.docx - Day 1-2 checklist to cover all the bases 

    3D Routesetting Guide.pdf - Covers pretty much everything a new routesetter needs to know, but has a lot of information and good reminders throughout 

    RS_Safety_&_Work_at_Height_Policy.pdf - Extensive up to date WaH policies/standards 

     

 

 

 

 

 

Glossary 

Surely we don’t need a glossary 

 